---
title: The Right Oil Study
description: When we started this study, we didn't know where we were heading
  and what all was going to come our way. All we knew was that we wanted to
  choose ‘The Right Oil’ for our project. After all, we don't want to serve our
  customers what we won't consume ourselves and deem unfit for usage.
author: Ankur Dubey
date: 2021-09-02T12:57:56.651Z
image: /assets/blog/kachori-5993335_1920.jpg
imageAlt: Deep fried kachoris
tags:
  - post
---
<div>

# Abstract

**When we started this study, we didn't know where we were heading and what all was going to come our way. All we knew was that we wanted to choose ‘The Right Oil’ for our project. After all, we don't want to serve our customers what we won't consume ourselves and deem unfit for usage.**

**Our product, ‘The Great Indian Kachori’ is a snack that goes long back in the history of rich Indian Tradition and is a deep-fried product. Each Kachori is supposed to swim in hot oil for at least 15 mins until it becomes all puffed up, flaky, crispy, and as we all Indians know, ‘Khasta’.**

**While it is swimming and dancing around in the hot oil, the Oil is doing its bit of entering the streets of Kachori layers pushing water out and making itself a resident of the vessels that run around on the exterior of the Kachori Layer.**

**Oil looks transparent but lots are happening inside this hot liquid which we don't see with naked eyes. We need science and analysis to understand how Oil behaves during deep-frying and once it enters our body how it contributes.**

**This study is aimed at finding out which oil we are going to use and to make this study available for our consumers and enthusiasts in this field to educate themselves and evaluate.**

</div>
<div>

# Introduction

We at Old School Foods strive to serve our customers, food that is well researched, developed and that we deem fit to consume and hence find joy in taking up challenging tasks like this study or going the ‘No-maida (refined flour)’ approach or basing our entire operations on using jaggery instead of processed sugar.

‘The Right Oil Study’ is one of our first such projects and we wish to contribute to society by adopting the best practices for all our basket brands with Kachori Kaka being the first one and more to come.

Hope you find the study insightful and that it helps you in making the best choices for your family :)

</div>
<div>

# The Start

Usually, when we have to clean a mess, we have to make our feet dirty. That's precisely what we are going to do. The only difference is that we don’t know how much there is to find but let's dive right in.

One would be amazed to find out, there are so many oils out there in the market and each oil is deemed the best, the healthiest, and the safest. While this is a statement that we hear quite often but it can't be true. So let’s start by picking up the most popular Oils that we hear about in the market.

|               |               |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| Avocado Oil   | Canola Oil    |
| Palm Oil      | Pistachio Oil |
| Coconut Oil   | Ghee          |
| Rice bran Oil | Safflower Oil |
| Groundnut Oil | Mustard Oil   |
| Sesame Oil    | Soybean Oil   |
| Olive Oil     | Sunflower Oil |

After reading up a bit, we gather some information on how these oils should be compared. Below are important factors, we shall be considering:

<div>

## A. Fatty Acid Composition

Each oil comes from a different source. In the case of vegetable oils, it comes from different fruits, seeds, nuts, etc. In the case of animal oils (in our case, ghee) it might be coming from dairy products having fats of their own.

1. Unsaturated Fatty Acids

   1. Monounsaturated Fatty Acid (MUFA)
   2. Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid (PUFA)
2. Saturated Fatty Acids
3. Trans Fatty Acids
4. Free Fatty Acids

</div>
<div>

## B. Smoke Point

Smoke point is the temperature at which oil starts burning and degrades itself. Oil continuously heated at temperatures above smoke point is not safe to consume and may also lead to the development of carcinogenic elements. \
This also considers suitability at deep-frying. Some oils because of their intrinsic properties are more stable when deep-frying either because of chemical composition or the presence of antioxidants.

</div>
<div>

## C. Health benefits and side-effects

Since each oil is coming from a different source, it also packs unique inherent properties which have their own benefits as well as side effects (probably on over-consumption)

</div>
<div>

## D. Vitamin composition

Each source of Oils also contains different levels of Vitamins. Vitamin E and Vitamin K are vitamins that are mostly found in oils but their quantity might be different.

</div>
<div>

## E. Cholesterol levels and calories

Most of the oils provide similar energy on consumption (calorific value). While we talk about cholesterol, there are two types of cholesterol: HDL and LDL, the former regarded as the good one.

</div>
<div>

## F. Unrefined or refined

Oil is extracted from the base (fruits, nuts, seeds, dairy) in multiple ways. These processes could produce unrefined or refined oil.

</div>
<div>

## G. Physical attributes of the oil

The oil has multiple physical characteristics like color, flavor, aroma, stickiness, etc. We use this comparison factor for oil since this is the first impression of the oil.

</div>
<div>

## H. Reusability of the Oil

While it's no surprise that the oil is reused in households and even in commercial setups. One has to be smart about how to select the oil that has a higher reusability factor as well as how to enhance the same.

</div>
</div>
<div>

# Acknowledgment

Before we get any further, Old School Foods would like to acknowledge the efforts put in by Ms. Narmada Rage and Mr. Alex Bernard for their keen understanding of the need to do this study. The study was not easy and Narmada had to read at least 50 research papers, several articles to find all the details about each oil. Alex acted as a strong mentor to Narmada and helped her structure all the information that she collaborated and quantify data to create a mathematical model to determine the best oil for our use case.

We hope that the study is also insightful to domestic households and other commercial setups and that it helps them choose the right oil for their usage.

</div>
<div>

# What is Edible Oil ?

Edible oil is a fatty liquid that is physically extracted from several vegetable sources like fruits, nuts, seeds, etc, or animal tissues. These act as a source of energy for the vegetables and when extracted can be used for cooking purposes like deep-frying, baking, and other types of cooking.

</div>
<div>

# Is Oil Bad for Health ?

There is no easy answer to this. Remember an old proverb that says, “Excess of everything is bad”. Most of us regard Olive Oil as the best Oil which we are going to take up separately. Even Olive Oil in [excess consumption](https://www.stylecraze.com/articles/unexpected-side-effects-of-olive-oil/) can lead to blockage of the gallbladder leading to gallstones and causing mild diarrhea. 

What the study is trying to find out is which Oil does the least amount of damage and is also beneficial in moderate quantities.

The study in no way is trying to promote heavy usage of edible oils in daily diets and is trying to be an eye-opener to several categories of edible oils and how to choose the right one for individual usage.

</div>
<div>

# Comparison Frames

In this section, we try to understand the comparison parameters individually and bring out the best in each.

<div>

## A. Fatty Acid Composition

Dietary fat despite having a bad reputation is vital for health since the body requires fat for energy and absorption of certain vitamins and minerals and many other critical processes.

#### 1. Unsaturated Fatty Acids

Unsaturated fatty acid is one in which there is one or more double bond in the fatty acid chain

1. **Monounsaturated Fatty Acid (MUFA)**

* One double bond
* MUFA may help lower LDL (bad cholesterol) and maintain a high level of HDL (good cholesterol)
* It may help lower the risk for cardiovascular disease and overall mortality
* Anti-inflammatory properties

2. **Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid (PUFA)**

* More than one double bond
* May lower LDL cholesterol
* Helps with muscle movement and blood clotting
* Since the human body doesn’t make PUFA, one has to get it through dietary intake
* Omega-3s are important for the fetal development of the brain
* Omega-6s support the cardiovascular, immune, and reproductive system

\
The greater the degree of unsaturation, in fatty acid (ie more double bonds), the more it is vulnerable to rancidity (ie oxidation of oils resulting in a bad taste and smell).

When double bonds are formed, hydrogen atoms are eliminated.

#### 2. Saturated Fatty Acids

Saturated fat is "saturated" with hydrogen atoms and contains no double bonds. SFA is solid at room temperature and hence also called “solid fat”. Research studies often suggest the impact of saturated fat on heart health, leaving this confusing for consumers. SFA raises LDL (bad cholesterol) levels and certain other heart disease risk factors, such as inflammation. Though it is not clear if it certainly poses risk for heart diseases. Since SFA doesn't have any double bonds, it is the most stable at high temperatures and doesn't break down easily.

#### 3. Trans Fatty Acids

This fatty acid is changed by a process called hydrogenation. This process aims to increase the shelf life of the fat making it harder at room temperature thus making crispier and flakier crusts. TFA can raise cholesterol levels and hence is advised to be consumed as little as possible. These can be found in processed foods, snack foods, such as chips and crackers, cookies, etc. TFA adds no nutritional value to the diet and may also harm health.

#### 4. Free Fatty Acids

Free Fatty acids (FFA) are produced by the hydrolysis of oils and fats. Since FFA are less stable than neutral oil, they are more prone to oxidation and to turning rancid.

One should try to consume more unsaturated fat instead of saturated fat and trans fat which may help improve cholesterol levels. The [proportion](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/10981129_Dietary_fat_and_heart_health_in_search_of_the_ideal_fat) of MUFA:PUFA:SFA for maintaining the ideal ratio of HDL/LDL is **40:30:30**. The below table contains our ranking for the selected oils.

| Rank | Oil           | MUFA | PUFA | SFA | Offset Angle |
| ---- | ------------- | ---- | ---- | --- | ------------ |
| 1    | Rice bran Oil | 34%  | 33%  | 33% | 0.13         |
| 2    | Groundnut Oil | 50%  | 30%  | 20% | 0.23         |
| 3    | Sesame Oil    | 41%  | 44%  | 15% | 0.34         |
| 4    | Pistachio Oil | 54%  | 34%  | 12% | 0.36         |
| 5    | Canola Oil    | 58%  | 32%  | 10% | 0.41         |
| 6    | Palm Oil      | 40%  | 11%  | 50% | 0.45         |
| 7    | Mustard Oil   | 60%  | 21%  | 12% | 0.45         |
| 8    | Olive Oil     | 70%  | 15%  | 15% | 0.52         |
| 9    | Soybean Oil   | 23%  | 58%  | 19% | 0.56         |
| 10   | Avocado Oil   | 76%  | 12%  | 12% | 0.60         |
| 11   | Safflower Oil | 79%  | 12%  | 9%  | 0.63         |
| 12   | Sunflower Oil | 82%  | 9%   | 9%  | 0.66         |
| 13   | Ghee          | 30%  | 4%   | 66% | 0.68         |
| 14   | Coconut Oil   | 7%   | 2%   | 91% | 0.96         |

From the above ranking, one might be surprised to see the likes of coconut, sunflower, olive, avocado oil, and ghee not making it to the top. However, it's been [established](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/10981129_Dietary_fat_and_heart_health_in_search_of_the_ideal_fat) that a high-mono diet inferior to a diet with a balanced MUFA:PUFA:SFA ratio.

</div>
<div>

## B. Smoke Point

When we talk about smoke point, there are few things to consider:

* Smoke point of the refined oil
* Smoke point of the unrefined oil
* Threshold of Oil temperature

Before we move further, it is important to understand the difference between unrefined and refined oil.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<strong>Factors</strong>
</td>
<td>
<strong>Unrefined</strong>
</td>
<td>
<strong>Refined</strong>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="5">
<strong>Extraction Process</strong>
</td>
<td>
<strong>Heat Exposure</strong>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Minimal exposure to the heat during extraction</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Exposed extensively to the heat</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<strong>Toxic Elements</strong>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Natural resins and other beneficial particles burn easily while cooking</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Toxic and harmful ingredients are eliminated after clarifying and sifting the raw crude oil</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<strong>Chemical Methods</strong>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">No chemical methods</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Chemical methods but without harsh or damaging chemicals</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<strong>Bleach/ Wash/ Deodorize</strong>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Not at all bleached or washed out and deodorized</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Washed out or decolorized and deodorized</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<strong>Natural Smell</strong>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">They contain the natural smell of the seed</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">The unwanted smell from the oil is removed</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<strong>Suitability for deep-frying</strong>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">- Best used unheated in dressings or with low heat sauteing or baking</span>
<br />
<span style="font-weight: 400;">- Natural resins and other beneficial particles burn easily and develop unpleasant flavors and unhealthful properties if overheated</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">- More resistant to smoking, high-heat cooking, and deep-frying</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<strong>Nutrition</strong>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">More nutritious</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Refining reduces the nutrient level</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<strong>Storage</strong>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Short storage life</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Particles and resins removed making it more stable for longer storage</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<strong>Appearance</strong>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">May appear cloudy or have visible sediment (does not compromise quality)</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">More thoroughly filtered and strained than unrefined</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<strong>Flavor/Aroma</strong>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Authentic in their color, taste, smell, and flavor</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Refining reduces the flavor (free from any bad odor)</span>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Video for reference: [Click here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ldokeeP8RM)

For our usage of deep-frying, we are not supposed to exceed 180*C and have to choose an oil that has a smoke point above this temperature. This also helps us reuse the oil conservatively and more safely since oil that reaches smoke point is deemed unfit for reuse.

Further, let's get into the smoke points of different oils and find which one matches our requirements.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: center;" colspan="2">
<strong>Deep-frying Threshold: 180*C</strong>
</th>
<th style="text-align: center;" colspan="2">
<strong>Smoke Point (*C)</strong>
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: center;">
<strong>Ranks</strong>
</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">
<strong>Oil</strong>
</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">
<strong>Unrefined</strong>
</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">
<strong>Refined</strong>
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">1</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Avocado Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">250</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">271</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">2</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Pistachio Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">190</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">266</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">3</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Rice bran Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">180</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">254</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">4</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Mustard Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">180</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">250</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">5</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Soybean Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">190</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">230</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">6</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Palm Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">170</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">240</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">9</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Safflower Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">107</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">266</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">7</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Sesame Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">176</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">232</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">8</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Olive Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">190</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">215</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">10</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Ghee</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">160</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">233</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">11</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Sunflower Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">160</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">232</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">12</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Groundnut Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">160</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">230</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">13</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Canola Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">160</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">229</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">14</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Coconut Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">177</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">204</span>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>
<div>

## C. Health benefits and side-effects

Each oil as mentioned earlier comes from a different source that could be a nut, seed, vegetable, or dairy. Inherent to the source, each oil will have different components and will impact the consumers’ health in different ways.

The study will not be able to highlight all the positive and negative impacts here as it is a comprehensive list, but let's try to cover up major points which will help us become more aware consumers.

### Avocado Oil

**Benefits**

* Inhibits the growth of prostate cancer, breast cancer, oral cancer
* Benefits heart health
* High in antioxidants and neutralizes free radicals
* Enhances the Absorption of Important Nutrients
* Removes toxic elements from the body

**Side-effects**

* Not good for pregnant and lactating mothers
* Causes skin allergies in some people
* Excess consumption damages liver

### Canola Oil

**Benefits**

* Anticancer Potential
* Reduce the risk of heart disease
* Prevents Inflammation
* inhibit cholesterol absorption
* Improves Glycemic Control

**Side-effects**

* Erucic acid causes damage to the Heart, Kidney, Liver

### Coconut Oil

**Benefits**

* Boost heart health
* MCTs help increase HDL (good cholesterol)
* Used in keto diet since MCTs are harder for the body to convert into stored fat and easier to burn off
* MCTs are also helpful for kidney disorder people and Alzheimer’s disease
* Help reduce harmful abdominal fat

**Side-effects**

* Not good for diabetic or liver disease patients

### Ghee

**Benefits**

* Butyric acid act as an anti-cancer agent
* Improves heart health
* Antioxidants presence make ghee as anti-inflammatory, neuroprotective
* CLA in the ghee helps in reducing body weight
* Balance the hormones especially the thyroid

**Side-effects**

* Ghee may contain COPs (Cholesterol Oxidation Compounds) which is carcinogenic

### Groundnut Oil

**Benefits**

* Resveratrol found in groundnut protects our cells from cancer
* Improves cardiovascular health and reduces chances of heart diseases
* Protects blood vessels from plaque deposits and toxins
* Phytochemicals (natural antioxidants) in the oil reduce inflammation
* Lowers cholesterol and reduces the risk of weight gain and prevents obesity
* Regulates blood sugar and increase insulin sensitivity

**Side-effects**

* Excess consumption may cause allergies

### Mustard Oil

**Benefits**

* Allyl isothiocyanate acts as a cancer chemo-preventive and slows cancer growth
* Improves cardiovascular health
* Allyl isothiocyanate and selenium has anti-inflammatory potential
* Lowers blood sugar and blood pressure

**Side-effects**

* Erucic acid is toxic and kills myocardial cells hence FDA 2016 banned mustard oil
* Tendency to irritate lungs

### Olive Oil

**Benefits**

* Protects the body against breast cancer
* Reduces cardiovascular diseases and chances of stroke
* Full of antioxidants like tocopherols, β-carotene, lutein, squalene, lipophilic and hydrophilic phenols
* Oleocanthal (found in Olive Oil) may affect several inflammatory diseases
* Reduces hyperlipidemia (high blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels) and hypertension (high blood pressure)
* Reduced the risk of type 2 diabetes

**Side-effects**

* Excessive consumption may cause stroke, massive fall in blood pressure, kidney failure, and gallstones

### Palm Oil

**Benefits**

* Helps in reducing the risk of cancer
* Helps in preventing cardiovascular issues
* It boosts bone health
* It acts as a blood coagulant

**Side-effects**

* Forms potentially carcinogenic substances on overheating
* Excess consumption causes a yellowing skin

### Pistachio Oil

**Benefits**

* Prevents Heart Attack
* increases HDL lowers LDL
* Stimulates insulin production, reduces blood sugar, and hence prevents diabetes
* Improves immune system

**Side-effects**

* It's not good for pregnant women
* High doses or overconsumption may cause allergies

### Rice Bran Oil

**Benefits**

* Tocotrienols (group of antioxidants) may have anticancer effects
* Has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects
* Oryzanol (found in rice bran oil) is good for cholesterol
* Support healthy blood sugar levels by improving insulin resistance, a risk factor for type 2 diabetes

**Side-effects**

* Lowers blood calcium in a pregnant woman
* Not good for people having digestive disorders

### Safflower Oil

**Benefits**

* It may have Anti-inflammatory properties
* Reduces cholesterol level
* The compounds in safflower oil thin the blood and promote the smooth flow of blood
* Helps in muscle growth

**Side-effects**

* It's not good for pregnant women
* Potentially severe side effects include cardiovascular disease, diabetes, obesity, hyperlipidemia, hyperthermia, and thrombocytopenia

### Sesame Oil

**Benefits**

* It may have Anti-inflammatory properties
* Reduces cholesterol level
* The compounds in safflower oil thin the blood and promote the smooth flow of blood
* Helps in muscle growth

**Side-effects**

* It's not good for pregnant women
* Appendix infection, hair loss, skin rashes, and diarrhea

### Soybean Oil

**Benefits**

* It may have Anti-inflammatory properties
* Reduces cholesterol level
* The compounds in safflower oil thin the blood and promote the smooth flow of blood
* Helps in muscle growth

**Side-effects**

* Studies found high consumption led to adverse metabolic changes
* Overconsumption may cause high blood sugar levels and fatty liver

### Sunflower Oil

**Benefits**
* It may have Anti-inflammatory properties
* Reduces cholesterol level
* The compounds in safflower oil thin the blood and promote the smooth flow of blood
* Helps in muscle growth

**Side-effects**

* Excess consumption increases fasting insulin, blood sugar levels and may cause allergies

Based on these benefits and side-effects and their severity, we have tried to rank them as below. The above-mentioned points may be sufficient to help consumers decide for themselves

| Ranks | Oil           |
| ----- | ------------- |
| 1     | Olive Oil     |
| 2     | Groundnut Oil |
| 3     | Avocado Oil   |
| 4     | Sunflower Oil |
| 5     | Sesame Oil    |
| 6     | Mustard Oil   |
| 7     | Coconut Oil   |
| 8     | Ghee          |
| 9     | Pistachio Oil |
| 10    | Rice bran Oil |
| 11    | Canola Oil    |
| 12    | Palm Oil      |
| 13    | Soybean Oil   |
| 14    | Safflower Oil |

</div>
<div>

## Vitamin composition

Inherent to the source of oil, the vitamin composition of these oils also differs. Mostly Vitamin E and Vitamin K are found in oils and they also have their own benefits.

**Vitamin E**

* Prevents cancer

  * Promotes healthy heart and reduces the risk of heart disease
  * Improves hair growth and skin health
  * Prevents cataract formation
  * Boosts immune system
  * Fights Osteoarthritis Inflammation

**Vitamin K**

* Anticancer potential

  * Prevents blood clots
  * Improves heart health
  * Reduces excessive menstrual flow
  * Prevents osteoporosis
  * Prevents internal bleeding
  * Improves cognitive health
  * Prevents hemorrhaging in babies
  * Protects the immune system

To be able to decide which oil is better in terms of these vitamins, we should look at the quantities each oil has to offer.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;" rowspan="2">
<strong>Rank</strong>
</td>
<td style="text-align: center;" rowspan="2">
<strong>Oil</strong>
</td>
<td style="text-align: center;" colspan="2">
<strong>per 100 gm Oil</strong>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">
<strong>Vit. E (mg)</strong>
</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">
<strong>Vit. K (&micro;g)</strong>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">1</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Pistachio Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">226</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">0</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">2</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Soybean Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">8.1</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">183.9</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">3</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Canola Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">27.34</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">71.3</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">4</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Olive Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">14.39</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">60.2</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">5</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Sunflower Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">41.08</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">11.8</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">6</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Rice bran Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">32.3</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">24.7</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">7</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Safflower Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">34.1</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">7.1</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">8</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Mustard Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">34</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">0</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">9</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Palm Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">15.94</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">8</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">10</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Groundnut Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">15.7</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">0.7</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">11</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Ghee</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">15.7</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">0</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">12</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Avocado Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">12</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">0</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">13</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Sesame Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">0.2</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">1.8</span>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">14</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">Coconut Oil</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">0.2</span>
</td>
<td>
<span style="font-weight: 400;">0.5</span>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>
<div>

## Cholesterol levels and calories

* The cholesterol level in each oil is near 0 and there is no additional cholesterol that these oils pump into the body. Although the fatty acids in these oils can impact in maintaining HDL and LDL in the body
* Ghee packs 256 mg cholesterol in 100 gm serving
* Each oil provides similar calories on intake ie 884 calories in 100 gm serving

</div>
<div>

## Physical attributes of the oil

The physical attributes of these oils that we are going to cover here play certain importance in the perception of these oils and they also add to the flavor/aroma or the usage of the oil. From the presentation point of view, below is the data and our rankings.

<div class="tabcols">

<table >
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <th>
            <strong>Ranks</strong>
          </th>
          <th>
            <strong>Oil</strong>
          </th>
          <th>
            <strong>Aroma</strong>
          </th>
          <th>
            <strong>Flavor</strong>
          </th>
          <th>
            <strong>Appearance</strong>
          </th>
          <th>
            <strong>Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise)</strong>
            <strong>Water ~ 0.01 Poise</strong>
          </th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            1
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Ghee
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Rich Ghee flavor
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Rich Ghee flavor
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Pale to yellow color
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.0463
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            2
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Canola Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Odorless
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Mild
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Dark yellow color
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.0462
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            3
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Rice bran Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Mild
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Little flavor
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Golden brown to brown
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.0398
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            4
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Sunflower Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Neutral
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Neutral
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Amber
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.0323
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            5
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Groundnut Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Mild, pleasant, nutty
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Sweet taste
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Deep yellow color
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.038
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            6
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Sesame Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Mild
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Nutty and mellow
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Pale yellow
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.0351
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            7
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Avocado Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Mild
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Bitter and nutty
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Intense/Emerald green
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.0364
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            8
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Mustard Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Strong
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Strong nutty
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Orangish-red or amber&nbsp;
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.039
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            9
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Soybean Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Beany
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Beany
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Dark yellow/Light green
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.0405
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            10
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Safflower Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Neutral
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Slight nutty and earthy
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Deep yellow to golden
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.0299
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            11
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Olive Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Pungent
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Bitter and fruity
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Green to deep yellow
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.0341
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            12
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Palm Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Mild
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Nutty flavor
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Medium yellow color
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.028
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            13
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Coconut Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Coconut flavor
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Coconut flavor
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Snow White/Colorless
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.025
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td data-th="Rank">
            14
          </td>
          <td data-th="Oil">
            Pistachio Oil
          </td>
          <td data-th="Aroma">
            Strong flavor
          </td>
          <td data-th="Flavor">
            Distinctive pistachio
          </td>
          <td data-th="Appearance">
            Deep green color
          </td>
          <td data-th="Stickiness/ Viscosity (Poise) Water ~ 0.01 Poise">
            0.0304
          </td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

</div>

</div>
<div>

## Reusability of the Oil

Reusability of oil is a topic where one feels like reusing the oil without understanding the fundamentals behind its suitability to be reused.

**1. What happens when you use fresh oil?**

The oil has natural components which get heated along with the oil during cooking. These components may add additional flavor, the aroma when heated.

**2. What happens when you heat oil at the smoke point?**

Smoke point is essentially the temperature at which the oil (or the components) start burning.

Like any other substance, when these components are heated to a high temperature (say smoke point or above), they may burn, leaving them unsuitable for consumption.

Heating at smoke point (or above) oxidizes oil, creates free radicals, and also causes the unpleasant odors and flavor that is associated with rancidity. 

**3. What are free radicals and are they harmful?**

While cooking, these components get oxidized and generate free radicals which contribute to the etiology of many chronic health problems such as cardiovascular and inflammatory disease, cataracts, and cancer. 

**4. What role do Natural(or synthetic) antioxidants play?**

Antioxidants prevent the oxidation of oil and hence the generation of free radicals. They also reduce induced tissue damage by preventing the formation of radicals, scavenging them, or by promoting their decomposition.

Some oils have naturally abundant oxidants like avocado, groundnut, olive, sunflower, etc. Also, there are some naturally occurring antioxidants coming from phytochemicals that inhibit oxidation if added to the oil. Then, there are some synthetic antioxidants like BHT, BHA, TBHQ, and propyl gallate which are added in oils while deep-frying to artificially inhibit oxidation while cooking. Synthetic oils may have certain side effects.

As part of traditional methods, in some parts of India, adding alum to the oil is a common practice while deep-frying. As a surprise, alum is a mild anti-oxidant.

**5. How is the reusability of the oil decided?**

Now that it is clear what makes oil unusable for reuse, we are in a better position to decide how to evaluate the oil on its reusability factor.

* Most of the oils can be reused once
* Certain oils which have the presence of antioxidants in their composition can be reused twice
* Olive oil has an abundance of natural antioxidants that can be reused thrice
* Oils not touching the smoke point in their usage are more reusable than oils heated to smoke point. Hence, it is advisable to select the oil which has a high smoke point which delays the burning process and generation of free-radicals
* Once the oil starts generating foam while using, it is past its point of reuse

**6. What to do with the used oil?**

* Once the oil starts generating foam while using, it is past its point of reuse
* The oil that was deemed unfit for high heating can be used for low-heating purposes like shallow frying or tossing, etc. 
* The oil that is unfit for any consumption at all should be properly discarded.
* Biodiesel can be generated from waste edible oils and can be sourced to the appropriate vendors. [Video for reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1FcDsiTJSMs)

</div>
</div>
<div>

# Conclusion

With this study, we have surely educated ourselves and also made an effort to raise awareness for our consumers. Choose your oil carefully and be wary of what you are consuming. 

French lawyer, Anthelme Brillat-Savarin, in 1826 wrote,
***"Dis-moi ce que tu manges, je te dirai ce que tu es."***
**Translation:** Tell me what you eat and I will tell you what you are

### **References**

<details>
  <summary>View articles, reports and papers referenced to write this post.</summary>


  
[Dietary fat and heart health: in search of the ideal fat](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/10981129_Dietary_fat_and_heart_health_in_search_of_the_ideal_fat)

[What’s the Difference Between Saturated and Unsaturated Fat?](https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/saturated-vs-unsaturated-fat#unsaturated-fat)

[University of Michigan Health - Types of Fats](https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/aa160619)

</details>